Update docs and adds a guide for accessing metadata (#1411)
higherkindness/mu-scala: microsite/src/main/docs/guides/accessing-metadata.md

---
layout: docs
title: Accessing metadata on services
section: guides
permalink: /guides/accessing-metadata
---

# Context on services

> Mu provides way to create contexts available in the client and/or in the server. Specifically, it provides the following features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mu provides a way to create contexts available in the client and server. Specifically, it offers the following features.
```

## Client

> * For every RPC call, you need to create an initial context that will be passed to the client
> * The client will have the ability to operate and transform that context, that will be sent to the server in the headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For every RPC call, you need to create an initial context that will be passed to the client
* The client will have the ability to operate and transform that context, which will be sent to the server in the headers.
```

## Server

* The server will have the ability to extract the context information from the request headers and use them.

## How to use

> We'll assume the following service definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume the following service definition:
```

```scala mdoc:silent
import higherkindness.mu.rpc.protocol._

case class HelloRequest(name: String)
case class HelloResponse(greeting: String)

@service(Protobuf, namespace = Some("com.foo"))
trait MyService[F[_]] {

  def SayHello(req: HelloRequest): F[HelloResponse]

}
```

> Let's look at how to enable the context on the client side first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at enabling the context on the client-side first.
```

### Client side

Ordinarily, if you don't want to use this feature, you would create a cats-effect
`Resource` of an RPC client using the macro-generated `MyService.client` method:

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.effect._
import higherkindness.mu.rpc.{ChannelFor, ChannelForAddress}

object OrdinaryClientApp extends IOApp {

  val channelFor: ChannelFor = ChannelForAddress("localhost", 8080)

  val clientRes: Resource[IO, MyService[IO]] =
    MyService.client[IO](channelFor)

  def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] =
    clientRes.use { client =>
      for {
        resp <- client.SayHello(HelloRequest("Chris"))
        _    <- IO(println(s"Response: $resp"))
      } yield (ExitCode.Success)
    }
}
```

To obtain a client with the context available, use `MyService.contextClient[F, C]` instead of
`MyService.client`.

This returns a `MyService[Kleisli[F, C, *]]`, i.e. a client which takes
an arbitrary `C` as input and returns a response inside the `F` effect.

> This method requires an implicit instance in the scope. Concretely a `ClientContext[F, C]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method requires an implicit instance in scope, specifically a `ClientContext[F, C]`:
```

> ```scala

Reviewer: question: could we turn this into a mdoc block?

Author: This is already defined in the scope. Do you know if there's a way to embeed scala sources?

Reviewer: Maybe you could use `mdoc:nest`? https://scalameta.org/mdoc/docs/modifiers.html#nest

Author: I tried, but that doesn't stop that code from providing new definitions to the scope. Honestly, I don't think this needs to be checked, it doesn't represent snippets that the users need to copy, just samples about how  the current code looks

import cats.effect.Resource
import io.grpc.{CallOptions, Channel, Metadata, MethodDescriptor}

final case class ClientContextMetaData[C](context: C, metadata: Metadata)

trait ClientContext[F[_], C] {

  def apply[Req, Res](
      descriptor: MethodDescriptor[Req, Res],
      channel: Channel,
      options: CallOptions,
      current: C
  ): Resource[F, ClientContextMetaData[C]]

}
```

A `ClientContext` is an algebra that will take different information from the current call and the initial context (`current`)

> and need to generate a transformed context and an `io.grpc.Medatada`. The metadata is the information that will travel through

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and generates a transformed context and an `io.grpc.Metadata`. The metadata is the information that will travel through
```

> A `ClientContext` is an algebra that will take different information from the current call and the initial context (`current`)
> and need to generate a transformed context and a `io.grpc.Medatada`. The metadata is the information that will travel through
> the wire in the requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `ClientContext` is an algebra that will take different information from the current call and the initial context (`current`)
and need to generate a transformed context and an `io.grpc.Medatada`. The metadata is the information that will travel through
the wire in the requests.
```

> There's a utility `def` in the companion object for generating a `ClientContext` instance from a function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a `def` utility in the companion object for generating a `ClientContext` instance from a function:
```

import cats.data.Kleisli
import io.grpc.Metadata
import higherkindness.mu.rpc.internal.context.ClientContext

object TracingClientApp extends IOApp {

  val channelFor: ChannelFor = ChannelForAddress("localhost", 8080)
  
  val key: Metadata.Key[String] = Metadata.Key.of("key", Metadata.ASCII_STRING_MARSHALLER)
  
  implicit val cc: ClientContext[IO, String] = ClientContext.impl[IO, String]((tag, md) => IO(md.put(key, tag)))

  val clientRes: Resource[IO, MyService[Kleisli[IO, String, *]]] =
    MyService.contextClient[IO, String](channelFor)

  def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] =
    clientRes.use { client =>
      val kleisli = client.SayHello(HelloRequest("Chris"))
      for {
        resp <- kleisli.run("my-tag")
        _    <- IO(println(s"Response: $resp"))
      } yield (ExitCode.Success)
    }

}
```

### Server side

For the server, as usual, we need an implementation of the service (shown below):

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.Applicative
import cats.syntax.applicative._

class MyAmazingService[F[_]: Applicative] extends MyService[F] {

  def SayHello(req: HelloRequest): F[HelloResponse] =
    HelloResponse(s"Hello, ${req.name}!").pure[F]

}
```

> Ordinarily, if you were not using context, you would create a gRPC service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, if you were not using context, you would need to create a gRPC service
```

definition using the macro-generated `MyService.bindService` method, specifying
your effect monad of choice:

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.effect.{IO, IOApp, ExitCode}
import higherkindness.mu.rpc.server.{GrpcServer, AddService}

object OrdinaryServer extends IOApp {

  implicit val service: MyService[IO] = new MyAmazingService[IO]

  def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] = (for {
    serviceDef <- MyService.bindService[IO]
    _          <- GrpcServer.defaultServer[IO](8080, List(AddService(serviceDef)))

>   } yield ()).useForever

Reviewer 2: TIL `useForever`

}
```

To use the same service with context enabled, you need to call the
`MyService.bindContextService` method instead.

`bindContextService[F[_], C]` differs from `bindService[F[_]]` in two ways, which
we will explain below.

1. It takes a `MyService` as an implicit argument, but instead of a
   `MyService[F]` it requires a `MyService[Kleisli[F, C, *]]`.
2. It expects an implicit instance of `ServerContext[F, C]` in the scope.

A `ServerContext[F, C]` is an algebra that specifies how to build a context from the metadata

```scala
import cats.effect._
import io.grpc.{Metadata, MethodDescriptor}

trait ServerContext[F[_], C] {

  def apply[Req, Res](descriptor: MethodDescriptor[Req, Res], metadata: Metadata): Resource[F, C]

}
```

> Like in the case of the client, we have a `def` in the companion object that make us easier to build instances of `ServerContext`s:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like in the case of the client, we have a `def` in the companion object that makes it easier to build instances of `ServerContext`s:
```
